4 Diagram Types for Better Project Management

Project Management is hard and it gets even harder if you don't have the right information at your disposal. Only 71% of
projects manage to meet the agreed scope and only 28% of projects manage to meet the budget requirements. With stats like
that, it's no wonder companies emphasize on hiring experienced and certified project managers.

And experienced project managers know that success of any project relies on having the right information at the right
time. And good visualization tools help you get that information quickly and also enables you to communicate that
information quickly to your team, stakeholders etc.

SWOT Analysis in Project Management
S - STRENGTHS
W - WEAKNESSES
O - OPPORTUNITIES
T - THREATS

STRENGTHS
-> Availability of resources
-> Track record (past experiences)
-> Skills of the team
-> Financial resources

WEAKNESSES
-> Deadlines and time management
-> Resources for contingency funding
-> Completion of other projects
-> Feasibility of the project schedule

OPPORTUNITIES
-> Development of a new product or service
-> Financial gain
-> Targeting a new market
-> A step ahead of the competition

THREATS
-> Competitive prices in the new market
-> Environmental factors
-> Taxes and political influences
-> Loss of key staff members


SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. And you need to identify all of them before you start
planning your projects. This is also a perfect opportunity for other stakeholders of the projects to provide their input.

For example in an IT project, a team leader will have a better understanding of the technical requirements of the
project and whether there are resources to fulfill those requirements.
Similarly, a third party consultant can give input on the current trends and what your competitors are doing etc. All
these details are important to understand the overall picture before you start your project.

Understanding the overall picture has become a key component in  modern project management. This is why project
management tools focus on integrating themselves with other external business tools;
for example, WorkflowMax I integrates with HubSpot, Xero, SalesForce etc. This enables you to quickly access data that
is important to the success of the project. You can get started immediately using our SWOT analysis templates.


Gantt Charts in Project Management:
Gantt charts are one of the easiest ways to quickly visualize a project and all its subtasks. Although they become less
useful in complex projects with lots of tasks, for less complex projects, they provide a great way to measure progress
and define outcomes.
Even for complex projects, they can be used to provide a quick overview of the project to stakeholders. You can clearly
show the timeline of the project, dependencies between tasks and also the resource allocation for the project.
Most project management software have built in tools to generate the Gantt chart once you've added the tasks which show
how deeply intertwined(twist or twinned together) Gantt charts are with project management. Find these ready to use
gantt chart templates to get started right away.


Work Breakdown Structures in Project Management
A Work breakdown structure is a simple diagram type that is used to break large tasks into manageable sub tasks. Here,
you don't have to worry about dependencies, time allocation or the resources. This is mostly done by smaller teams who
are part of a larger project.
The sub tasks derived from this exercises are used in Gantt charts and activity diagrams which have the ability to show
dependencies and other factors useful to the project.


Activity Diagrams in Project Management:
In complex objects with lots of subtasks and interdependent tasks, activity diagrams are preferred over Gantt charts.
They have a much better mechanism to show dependencies and enable the project manager to identify critical paths in a
project.

Once you identify the critical paths, it's easier to allocate resources; this will help you to significantly reduce the
slack time of various teams.

In a typical project, you're likely to see both Gantt charts and activity diagrams used in conjunction.

As you can see there are many tested and proven diagram types that you can use to visualize your project and make
correct decisions. It's unlikely that you will use all of them in a single project, but using some of them will
definitely make it easier to manage your project.


